FIRST-CLASS PERFORMANCE
Zero Hour grew out of Naperville District 203’s unique approach to physical
education, which has gained national attention and become the model for a type
of gym class that I suspect would be unrecognizable to any adult reading this.
No getting nailed in dodgeball, no flunking for not showering, no living in fear
of being the last kid picked.
The essence of physical education in Naperville 203 is teaching fitness instead
of sports. The underlying philosophy is that if physical education class can be
used to instruct kids how to monitor and maintain their own health and fitness,
then the lessons they learn will serve them for life. And probably a longer and
happier life at that. What’s being taught, really, is a lifestyle. The students are
developing healthy habits, skills, and a sense of fun, along with a knowledge of
how their bodies work. Naperville’s gym teachers are opening up new vistas for
their students by exposing them to such a wide range of activities that they can’t
help but find something they enjoy. They’re getting kids hooked on moving
instead of sitting in front of the television. This couldn’t be more important,
particularly since statistics show that children who exercise regularly are likely
to do the same as adults.
But it’s the impact of the fitness-based approach on the kids while they’re still
in school that initially grabbed my attention. The New PE curriculum has been in
place for seventeen years now, and its effects have shown up in some
unexpected places — namely, the classroom.
It’s no coincidence that, academically, the district consistently ranks among
the state’s top ten, even though the amount of money it spends on each pupil —
considered by educators to be a clear predictor of success — is notably lower
than other top-tier Illinois public schools. Naperville 203 includes fourteen
elementary schools, five junior highs, and two high schools. For the sake of
comparison, let’s look at Naperville Central High School, where Zero Hour
began. Its per-pupil operating expense in 2005 was $8,939 versus $15,403 at
Evanston’s New Trier High School. New Trier kids scored on average two
points higher on their ACT college entrance exams (26.8), but they fared worse
than Central’s kids on a composite of mandatory state tests, which are taken by
every student, not just those applying to college. And Central’s composite ACT
score for the graduating class of 2005 was 24.8, well above the state average of
20.1.
Those exams aren’t nearly as telling as the Trends in InternationalMathematics and Science Study (TIMSS), a test designed to compare students’
knowledge levels from different countries in two key subject areas. This is the
exam cited by New York Times editorialist Thomas Friedman, author of The
World Is Flat, when he laments that students in places like Singapore are “eating
our lunch.” The education gap between the United States and Asia is widening,
Friedman points out. Whereas in some Asian countries nearly half of the
students score in the top tier, only 7 percent of U.S. students hit that mark.
TIMSS has been administered every four years since 1995. The 1999 edition
included 230,000 students from thirty-eight countries, 59,000 of whom were
from the United States. While New Trier and eighteen other schools along
Chicago’s wealthy North Shore formed a consortium to take the TIMSS (thereby
masking individual schools’ performance), Naperville 203 signed up on its own
to get an international benchmark of its students’ performance. Some 97 percent
of its eighth graders took the test — not merely the best and the brightest. How
did they stack up? On the science section of the TIMSS, Naperville’s students
finished first, just ahead of Singapore, and then the North Shore consortium.
Number one in the world. On the math section, Naperville scored sixth, behind
only Singapore, Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong, and Japan.
As a whole, U.S. students ranked eighteenth in science and nineteenth in
math, with districts from Jersey City and Miami scoring dead last in science and
math, respectively. “We have huge discrepancies among our school districts in
the United States,” says Ina Mullis, who is a codirector of TIMSS. “It’s a good
thing that we’ve at least got some Napervilles — it shows that it can be done.”
I won’t go so far as to say that Naperville’s kids are brilliant specifically
because they participate in an unusual physical education program. There are
many factors that inform academic achievement. To be sure, Naperville 203 is a
demographically advantaged school district: 83 percent white, with only 2.6
percent in the low income range, compared with 40 percent in that range for
Illinois as a whole. Its two high schools boast a 97 percent graduation rate. And
the town’s major employers are science-centric companies such as Argonne,
Fermilab, and Lucent Technologies, which suggests that the parents of many
Naperville kids are highly educated. The deck — in terms of both environment
and genetics — is stacked in Naperville’s favor.
On the other hand, when we look at Naperville, two factors really stand out:
its unusual brand of physical education and its test scores. The correlation is
simply too intriguing to dismiss, and I couldn’t resist visiting Naperville to see
for myself what was happening there. I’ve long been aware of the TIMSS test
and how it points to the failings of public education in this country. Yet the
Naperville 203 kids aced the test. Why? It’s not as if Naperville is the onlywealthy suburb in the country with intelligent, educated parents. And in poor
districts where Naperville-style PE has taken root, such as Titusville,
Pennsylvania (which I’ll discuss later), test scores have improved measurably.
My conviction, and my attraction to Naperville, is that its focus on fitness plays
a pivotal role in its students’ academic achievements.THE NEW PE
The Naperville revolution started, as such things often do, with equal parts
idealism and self-preservation. A visionary junior high physical education
teacher named Phil Lawler got the movement off the ground after he came
across a newspaper article in 1990 reporting that the health of U.S. children was
declining.
“It said the reason they weren’t healthy was that they weren’t very active,”
recalls Lawler, a tall man in his fifties, with rimless glasses, who dresses in
khakis and white sneakers. “These days everybody knows we have an obesity
epidemic,” he continues. “But pick up a paper seventeen years ago and that kind
of article was unusual. We said, We have these kids every day; shouldn’t we be
able to affect their health? If this is our business, I thought, we’re going
bankrupt.”
He already felt like his profession received no respect; schools had started
cutting phys ed from the curriculum, and now this. A former college baseball
pitcher who missed out on the majors, Lawler is a sincere salesman and a natural
leader who became a gym teacher to stay close to sports. In addition to teaching
PE at District 203’s Madison Junior High, he coached Naperville Central’s
baseball team and served as the district coordinator for PE, but even in these
respectable posts, sometimes he was embarrassed to admit what he did for a
living. Part of what he saw in that article was an opportunity — a chance to
make his job matter.
When Lawler and his staff at Madison took a close look at what was
happening in gym, they saw a lot of inactivity. It’s the nature of team sports:
waiting for a turn at bat, waiting for the center’s snap, waiting for the soccer ball
to come your way. Most of the time, most of the players just stood around. So
Lawler decided to shift the focus to cardiovascular fitness, and he instituted a
radical new feature to the curriculum. Once a week in gym class, the kids would
run the mile. Every single week! His decision met with groans from students,
complaints from parents, and notes from doctors.
He was undeterred, yet he quickly recognized that the grading scale
discouraged the slowest runners. To offer nonathletes a shot at good marks, the
department bought a couple of Schwinn Airdyne bikes and allowed students to
earn extra credit. They could come in on their own time and ride five miles to
raise their grades. “So any kid who wanted to get an A could get an A if he
worked for it,” Lawler explains. “Somewhere in this process, we got intopersonal bests. Anytime you got a personal best, no matter what it was, you
moved up a letter grade.” And this led to the founding principle of the approach
he dubbed the New PE: Students would be assessed on effort rather than skill.
You didn’t have to be a natural athlete to do well in gym.
But how does one judge the individual effort of forty kids at a time? Lawler
found his answer at a physical education conference he organized every spring.
He worked hard to turn the event into an exchange of fresh ideas and
technologies, and to encourage attendance he talked the vendors into donating
door prizes. Each year at the beginning of the conference, he would push a towel
cart through the aisles, collecting bats and balls and other sporting goods. Cast in
among the bounty one year was a newfangled heart rate monitor, which at the
time was worth hundreds of dollars. He couldn’t help himself; he stole it for the
revolution. “I saw that son of a buck,” he freely admits, “and I said, That’s a
door prize for Madison Junior High!”
During the weekly mile, he tested the device on a sixth-grade girl who was
thin but not the least bit athletic. When Lawler downloaded her stats, he couldn’t
believe what he found. “Her average heart rate was 187!” he exclaims. As an
eleven-year-old, her maximum heart rate would have been roughly 209, meaning
she was plugging away pretty close to full tilt. “When she crossed the finish line,
she went up to 207,” Lawler continues. “Ding, ding, ding! I said, You gotta be
kidding me! Normally, I would have gone to that girl and said, You need to get
your ass in gear, little lady! It was really that moment that caused dramatic
changes in our overall program. The heart rate monitors were a springboard for
everything. I started thinking back to all the kids we must have turned off to
exercise because we weren’t able to give them credit. I didn’t have an athlete in
class who knew how to work as hard as that little girl.”
He realized that being fast didn’t necessarily have anything to do with being
fit.
One of Lawler’s favorite statistics is that less than 3 percent of adults over the
age of twenty-four stay in shape through playing team sports, and this
underscores the failings of traditional gym class. But he knew he couldn’t have
the students run the mile every day, so he set up a program of what they have
termed “small-sided sports” — three-on-three basketball or four-on-four soccer
— where the students are constantly moving. “We still play sports,” Lawler
says. “We just do them within a fitness model.” Instead of being tested on such
trivia as the dimensions of a regulation volleyball court, Naperville’s gym
students are graded on how much time they spend in their target heart rate zones
during any given activity.
“We developed the program not knowing what we were doing,” Lawler says.And yet, the New PE has managed to put into practice principles consistent with
all the new research about exercise and the brain.CARRYING THE TORCH
Every revolutionary leader needs a lieutenant, and Lawler couldn’t have chosen
a more able agitator than Paul Zientarski, Naperville Central High School’s
physical education coordinator and former football coach. To students and
colleagues, Zientarski is Mr. Z, a gray-haired furnace of a man with steady eyes
and a facts-is-facts delivery. He has the presence of Mike Ditka and Bill Parcells
rolled into one formidable figure of authority. “It took me the longest time to
convince him of this stuff,” says Lawler of his friend and ally. “But once he buys
into it, get out of his way. Because he’s going to shove it down your throat if he
has to.”
As their movement grew, Lawler would take the lead in proselytizing the
outside world with the fitness-not-sports message, talking to Newsweek and
testifying before the U.S. Senate, and Zientarski would become the unwavering
enforcer of the mission back home, transforming the phys ed program at
Naperville Central into a well-oiled working model of the New PE. Lawler
retired from teaching in 2004 after being diagnosed with colon cancer, but he has
continued to lobby for daily physical education even during his back-and-forth
battle with the disease.
They’ve both become grassroots experts on the subject of exercise and the
brain. They learned by grilling speakers from the conferences Lawler organized,
attending sports physiology seminars, reading neuroscience research papers, and
constantly e-mailing their findings to each other. And they’ve taken it upon
themselves to educate their colleagues as well. It’s not uncommon for Zientarski
to buttonhole an English teacher in the hallway and hand her a stack of the latest
brain research — homework from the gym teacher.
It’s because of their relentless spirit of investigation that I got to know these
two men. Lawler heard me interviewed on the National Public Radio program
The Infinite Mind, during which I referred to a protein that’s elevated during
exercise as “Miracle-Gro for the brain.” Unbeknownst to me, Lawler began
repeating the phrase in interviews of his own, including one with the director of
a documentary film about obesity in America, Super Size Me (2004).
I had been looking for a concrete way to illustrate the effects of exercise on
learning for this book, and focusing on a school district was a natural way to do
that. But I also think the sheer size of the Naperville experiment gives it a
broader resonance. The story is about students, but the lessons apply to adults
too. What Naperville provides is a powerful case study on how aerobic activitycan transform not only the body but also the mind. It also happens to be a
wonderful template for reshaping our society.
So I made the journey to Illinois, and as I sat with Lawler and Zientarski in
the atrium of the Naperville Holiday Inn, I listened to them say things I never
expected to hear from a couple of coaches. “In our department, we create the
brain cells,” Zientarski says. “It’s up to the other teachers to fill them.”
A NEW STEREOTYPE: THE SMART JOCK
Lawler’s tack runs opposite the trend in American public schools of cutting
physical education in favor of increasing study time in math, science, and
English — an effort to help students pass tests dictated by the No Child Left
Behind Act. Only 6 percent of U.S. high schools offer a daily physical education
class. At the same time, kids are spending an average of 5.5 hours a day in front
of a screen of some sort — television, computer, or handheld device. It’s not
surprising that American children are less active than they’ve ever been.
That is why I was so inspired by what’s going on in Naperville. The first time
I visited, it was just before school let out for the summer, but you wouldn’t have
known that by watching gym class at Madison Junior High. There must have
been thirty kids jumping around with the sort of energy and enthusiasm you
would only expect to see at the beginning of the school year: lining up to get on
the climbing wall, arguing about who was going to get to use a new exercise
bike attached to a video-game monitor, running wildly on treadmills, playing a
video game called Dance Dance Revolution, where you dance on a control pad.
They were all wearing heart rate monitors, and — most important — they were
all engaged.
Some 30 percent of U.S. schoolchildren are overweight — six times more
than in 1980 — and another 30 percent are on the cusp. In Lawler’s district, an
astonishing 97 percent of freshmen in 2001, and again in 2002, were at a healthy
weight according to body mass index guidelines from the Centers for Disease
Control (CDC). In the spring of 2005, an independent assessment of Naperville
203 students’ fitness showed even better results. A sports physiologist named
Craig Broeder and a team of his graduate students from Benedictine University
came in and tested a random sampling of 270 students, from sixth graders
through high school seniors. “I can tell you that the Naperville school system is
miles ahead of the national norm in terms of fitness,” says Broeder, a former
regional president of the American College of Sports Medicine. “It’s not evenclose. They had one male out of a hundred thirty something who was obese. It’s
amazing. Their percentages of body fat were way below national norms using
the CDC’s height and weight standards. On other fitness variables, something
like ninety-eight percent of the students passed.”
Broeder is perfectly aware of Naperville’s demographics, yet he’s still
impressed. “The numbers are too high for it to just be that,” he says. “The PE
program itself has to have had an additive impact on what that population would
achieve otherwise. Let me put it this way: you can’t say for sure that the PE
program does it, but their fitness is so far off the scale that it can’t be just
because it’s Naperville.”
But what, exactly, do we know about the effect of gym on GPA? Few
researchers have tackled the question, although one study from Virginia Tech
showed that cutting gym class and allocating more time to math, science, and
reading did not improve test scores, as so many school administrators assume it
will. Because gym class can mean so many things, research in this area has
focused on the correlation between physical fitness and academic achievement.
The most telling studies come from the California Department of Education
(CDE). Over the past five years, the CDE has consistently shown that students
with higher fitness scores also have higher test scores.
The CDE correlated scores from standard achievement tests with scores from
the FitnessGram, the state-mandated physical assessment, for more than one
million students. The FitnessGram measures six areas: aerobic capacity,
percentage of body fat, abdominal strength and endurance, trunk strength and
flexibility, upper body strength, and overall flexibility. Students earn one point
for each area if they pass the minimum requirements, so the top score on the
FitnessGram is six. It’s worth noting that this test doesn’t measure how fit a
student is, just whether he or she is acceptably fit in each area. In other words,
it’s pass-fail.
In 2001 fit kids scored twice as well on academic tests as their unfit peers.
Among California’s 279,000 ninth graders, for instance, those who scored a six
on the FitnessGram ranked, on average, in the sixty-seventh percentile in math
and the forty-fifth percentile in reading on the Stanford Achievement Test. If
these scores seem less than stellar, consider those of the students who passed
only one of the six areas: they ranked in the thirty-fifth and twenty-first
percentiles, respectively.
When the CDE repeated the study in 2002, it factored in socioeconomic
status. As expected, students with a higher standard of living scored better on the
academic tests, but the results also showed that within the lower-income
students, fitter kids scored better than unfit kids. This is a powerful statistic initself. It suggests that although parents may not have immediate control over
their financial situations, they can improve their kids’ chances of performing
well by encouraging them to get in shape. Exercise could break the cycle.
The California studies don’t stand alone. In 2004 a panel of thirteen noted
researchers in fields ranging from kinesiology to pediatrics conducted a massive
review of more than 850 studies about the effects of physical activity on schoolage children. Most of the studies measured the effects of thirty to forty-five
minutes of moderate to vigorous physical activity three to five days a week.
They covered a wide range of issues, such as obesity, cardiovascular fitness,
blood pressure, depression, anxiety, self-concept, bone density, and academic
performance. Based on strong evidence in a number of these categories, the
panel issued a recommendation that schoolchildren should participate in one
hour (or more) of moderate to vigorous physical activity a day. Looking
specifically at academic performance, the panel found enough evidence to
support the findings of the California studies, and it also reported that physical
activity has a positive influence on memory, concentration, and classroom
behavior. It didn’t specify gym class, but you can see how the students in
Naperville are getting a healthy jump start